Oxford Nanopore’s protein nanopore sequencing platform uses ionic current blockages to detect nucleotides as they translocate through a biological nanopore. The Oxford Nanopore platform uses biological pores with single digit nanometer scale features (1.2 nm constriction in a 2nm barrel). The reliable fabrication of solid state nanopores with equivalent feature size would be extremely challenging.his is a comment on a new line.

If fabrication challenges were solved, it seems likely that Oxford Nanopore’s enzymatic motion control strategy could be combined with a solid state sensing platform. Such a platform may unfortunately not have any compelling advantage over a protein nanopore sequencing platform. Namely, the sequencing speed will likely be the same (420bp/s), and potentially accuracy limitations associated with the limited ability to accurately control translocation of the strand through the pore. It could however be more easily washable in situ, allowing the sensing mechanism to be reused indefinitely for multiple samples.

The readout read of an ionic current detection nanopore is likely limited to \< 1000bp/s, based solely on the number of and mobility of charge carriers. Other approaches have been suggested that address nanopore sequencing accuracy and speed limitations.

One example of this is tunneling current sensing. Here transverse electrodes are used to register a tunneling current. As nucleotides translocate through the sensing region they interfere with this tunneling current. This signal is then used to determine the sequence of the template.

This approach has been pursued commercially (Quantum Biosystems, Genvida) and in a number of academic labs. While a number of groups have shown that DNA can be imaged using tunneling currents (STM) there have been no reproducible results showing sequencing data on strand. Tunneling current detection promises higher accuracy (as larger currents can be generated), and higher readout speeds. But remains at present a research activity which may take decades to fulfill its promise, that is if insurmountable physical limitations are not discovered.

Nanopore embedded field effect sensors have also been proposed. These would embed a FET inside a nanopore, where the dielectric changes produced by nucleosides as they pass in close contact to the sensor would be detected through changes in the electric field. This approach is being pursued by startup iNanoBio. iNanoBio was founded 14 years ago, and to date no sequencing results have been reported. iNanoBio suggests that they may be able to reach extremely high readout speeds (millions of bases/s). However, related techniques such as scanning capacitance microscopy (SCM) have so far been limited to a few kilohertz[⁵¹](https://www.zotero.org/google-docs/?OyaVmX), suggesting this might be challenging.

Various other novel nanopore platforms are also in development such as optical nanopore platforms (Quantapore) or SBS-Nanopore systems (Genia, AxBio). In many cases the advantages of these platforms, particularly for diagnostic applications, is unclear.